In an article published in Learning Environments Research, Lorsbach and
Jinks (1999) drew attention to the lack of research relating psychosocial
learning environments with student academic self-efficacy. The present
article responds to that deficiency by reporting a correlational study of
students’ perceptions of classroom environment and academic efficacy. While classroom environment research focuses on the perceptions of 
class-room life, usually from the students’ perspective, academic efficacy 
research
draws attention to the importance of fostering self-belief and self-regula￾tory capabilities in students (Zimmerman, 1995). While many variables
contribute to a student’s sense of academic efficacy (Bandura, 1997), it 
is
plausible that the quality of the classroom environment in a particular 
sub-ject area is related to the perceived academic efficacy in that subject 
area.
JEFFREY P. DORMAN 244
The present study aims to investigate the closeness of this relationship in
secondary school mathematics classes.
The present study makes two distinctive contributions to the field of
learning environments. It is the first study to investigate the relationship
between classroom environment and academic efficacy. Additionally, by
using scales from two well-established instruments (viz. What Is Happen￾ing In This Classroom?, Constructivist Learning Environment Survey), it
was possible to establish the unique and joint contributions of each instru￾ment to explaining academic efficacy. This process provides insights into
the usefulness of both instruments in future research in this area. To pro￾vide a theoretical basis for this research, classroom environment and acad￾emic efficacy are reviewed briefly.
2. BACKGROUND
2.1. Classroom Environment
Research conducted over the past 30 years has shown the quality of the
classroom environment in schools to be a significant determinant of stu￾dent learning (Fraser, 1994, 1998a). That is, students learn better when they
perceive the classroom environment positively. Numerous research stud￾ies have shown that student perceptions of the classroom environment
account for appreciable amounts of variance in learning outcomes, often
beyond that attributable to background student characteristics. For exam￾ple, Goh and Fraser (1998) used the Questionnaire on Teacher Interaction
(QTI) (Wubbels & Levy, 1993) to establish associations between student
outcomes and perceived patterns of teacher-student interaction in primary
school mathematics classes in Singapore. Other studies have used class￾room environment scales as dependent variables in investigating varia￾tions in environment across different settings. Studies reviewed by Fraser
(1998b) have shown that classroom environment varies according to school
type (e.g. coeducational schools, boys’ schools and girls’ schools), year
level and subject area. Some areas of contemporary classroom environ￾ment research include investigating special education classrooms in Eng￾land (Adams, 2000), studying science classroom environment in Korea
(Kim, Fisher & Fraser, 2000) and defining differences between city and
country students’ perceptions of the learning environment (Waldrip &
Fisher, 2000).
The learning environment field has developed rapidly with an array of
validated instruments and research in at least 12 domains (e.g. evaluation
of educational innovations, comparison of actual and preferred environ-
CLASSROOM ENVIRONMENT AND ACADEMIC EFFICACY 245
ments, and changes in classroom environment during the transition from
primary to secondary school) (see Fraser, 1998b). Typically, empirical stud￾ies have employed these instruments or contextually modified derivatives
to assess the particular environment under investigation. For example, the
Catholic School Classroom Environment Questionnaire (CSCEQ) was
developed specifically to assess the environment in Australian Catholic
school classrooms (Dorman, 1999). The present study builds upon and
extends the learning environment field by studying associations between
classroom environment and academic efficacy.
2.2. Academic Efficacy
The broad psychological concept of self-efficacy has been the subject of
much theorising and research over the past two decades (see e.g. Bandura,
1997; Schunk, 1995). Within this field, one particularly strong area of in￾terest is that of academic efficacy, which refers to personal judgements of
one’s capabilities to organise and execute courses of action to attain des￾ignated types of educational performances (Zimmerman, 1995). Consist￾ent with self-efficacy theory, academic efficacy involves judgements on
capabilities to perform tasks in specific academic domains. Accordingly,
within a classroom learning environment, measures of academic efficacy
must assess students’ perceptions of their competence to do specific ac￾tivities. It is therefore not surprising to find that much academic efficacy
research has focused on specific areas of the formal school curriculum.
For example, Pajares (1996) investigated academic efficacy at mathemat￾ics-related tasks. Similarly, Schunk and Rice (1993) studied self-efficacy
among students receiving remedial educational services. Recently, Zeldin
and Pajares (2000) explored the self-efficacy beliefs of women in math￾ematical, scientific and technological careers.
Research studies have provided consistent, convincing evidence that
academic efficacy is positively related to academic motivation (e.g. Schunk
& Hanson, 1985), persistence (Lyman, Prentice-Dunn, Wilson & Bonfilio,
1984), memory performance (Berry, 1987), and academic performance
(Schunk, 1989). Multon, Brown and Lent (1991) performed a meta-analysis
of research studies that related academic efficacy to the attainment of bas￾ic cognitive skills, coursework, and standardised achievement tests. This
analysis revealed that academic efficacy is a consistent positive predictor
of academic achievement. However, the influence of academic efficacy
was not uniform. Whereas the strongest effect was for the influence of
academic efficacy on basic cognitive skills, the weakest effect was for the
influence of academic efficacy on standardised tests. According to Schunk
JEFFREY P. DORMAN 246
(1996), the relationship between academic efficacy and both motivation
and effort is reciprocal. That is, motivation and effort influence, and are
influenced by, academic efficacy. This suggests a type of multiplier effect:
as students perceive their progress in acquiring skills and gaining know￾ledge, their academic efficacy for further learning is enhanced. Schunk
(1996) notes that academic efficacy influences persistence provided that
the task is sufficiently difficult. In this situation, low academic efficacy
students opt out whereas students with high academic efficacy persevere
with the task.
According to Bandura (1997), there are four sources of self-efficacy:
enactive mastery experiences, vicarious experiences, verbal persuasion and
physiological and affective states. Analogously, Schunk (1996) believes
that students appraise their academic efficacy through performance, vicari￾ous (observational) experiences, forms of persuasion and physiological
reactions. While not explicitly recognised by efficacy theorists, some of
these sources can be attributed to the psychosocial learning environment
that students experience in their schools and classrooms. For example,
students in classrooms regularly observe their peers performing tasks suc￾cessfully and unsuccessfully. Even a cursory review of the learning envir￾onment literature of the past three decades indicates that the learning
environment is not an inert contributor to the sources of academic efficacy
identified by Bandura and Schunk. Indeed it is striking that academic ef￾ficacy theory has not recognised the potential of psychosocial environment
in explaining academic efficacy. The present study investigated this gap
in knowledge.
3. THE PRESENT RESEARCH
3.1. Aims
The study’s three aims were:
• to validate scales from the What Is Happening In This Classroom?
and Constructivist Learning Environment Survey questionnaires in
mathematics classes in Australia;
• to examine associations between students’ perceptions of mathemat￾ics classroom environment and their perceptions of academic efficacy
at mathematical tasks;
• to establish whether scales of the What Is Happening In This Class￾room? and the Constructivist Learning Environment Survey account
for unique variance in the Academic Efficacy Scale.
CLASSROOM ENVIRONMENT AND ACADEMIC EFFICACY 247
3.2. Sample
The identifiable sample employed in this study consisted of 1055 students
drawn from nine Australian secondary schools. Students from Grades 8,
10 and 12 participated in the study. Table I describes the sample. It should
be noted that students in each school were grouped according to year level.
The sample consisted of 27 school year groups. This grouping of students
was important because subsequent analyses used the school year group as
the unit of analysis.
3.3. Assessment of Classroom Environment
An important principle of the present study was to provide a comprehen￾sive, parsimonious assessment of contemporary classroom environment.
Significant recent work that attempts to bring parsimony to the field of
learning environments by combining the most salient scales from existing
questionnaires has produced an instrument called the What Is Happening
In This Classroom? questionnaire (WIHIC) (Aldridge & Fraser, 2000;
Fraser, 1998b). While the WIHIC is comprehensive, it is not designed to
assess constructivist classroom environments. In a constructivist environ￾ment, meaningful learning is a cognitive process in which students make
sense of the world in relation to the knowledge which they have constructed.
The Constructivist Learning Environment Survey (CLES) (Fraser, 1998b;
Taylor, Fraser & Fisher, 1997) was developed to assist researchers to as￾sess the constructivist dimensions of classrooms.
To provide a comprehensive assessment of classroom environment and
yet keep the study manageable, seven scales from the WIHIC and three
scales from the CLES were chosen. Based on scale descriptions provided
by the WIHIC and CLES developers, it was thought that the three CLES
scales complemented the seven WIHIC scales. From the original 56-item
WIHIC, 42 items from its seven a priori scales were selected. From the
CLES, 18 items from three scales were selected. Table II shows each of
TABLE I
Description of Identifiable Sample by Gender and Year Level
Level Sample size
Male Female Total
Year 8 191 172 363
Year 10 172 230 402
Year 12 134 156 290
Total 497 558 1055
JEFFREY P. DORMAN 248
these six-item scales and their common-sense descriptions. Each item used
a five-point response format (viz. Almost Never, Seldom, Sometimes,
Often, Almost Always). Additionally, Table II shows the classification of
each scale according to Moos’s (1974) three general categories for conceptualising human environments (viz. Relationship, Personal Development, and System Maintenance and System Change).
3.4. Assessment of Academic Efficacy
Perceived academic efficacy refers to students’ judgements of their ability to master the academic tasks that they are given in their classrooms. A
seven-item scale using items developed by Midgley and Urdan (1995)